Hi and welcome to this video in this video we're going to look at the equality testing problems when
we are dealing with floats.
And we saw a little bit of that in the last video where I showed you that in the code section and let's
take a quick look at this now and see again what the problems are.
So we saw that we can have some weirdness in our code if we try and use quality testing with floats.
Now this is not a Python bug.
It's just simply a result of how numbers are being stored using binary representations real numbers.
Right.
So floats.
So it's not a bug in Python.
It will be the same in other languages as well but it could be a bug in our code if we don't know how
to deal with it and how to work with it.
So again that very simple example we looked at in the last video.
Let's say we said X equal to that summation and y equal to 0.3.
Now in our minds when we look at this and we're looking at these decimal representations 0 1 2 1 0 1
0 1 0 1 3 These are decimal representations for remember that behind the scenes they're actually being
stored as binary representations.
And if we try and write X equals equals Y then that expression will actually evaluate to false.
Those are not equal numbers.
And so if we don't realize that and if we do expect these floats to be equal then there's going to be
a bug in our code.
Now we can look at what the numbers are like X while it's this number.
Why is this number here.
As you can see they're not exact.
That's their internal representation.
Convert it back to decimal mode we can see they're not the same and that's why it evaluates to false.
Now using rounding isn't necessarily going to solve the problem either depending on how you use rounding
because you can't expect round 0.1 come a one which is rounding 0.1 to one decimal point and we'll take
a look at rounding in a future video.
But that representation of this number here.
Well that's the same as 0.1 it can be you know a better or a more precise representation that's going
to be the same.
So if we try and do something like this well we end up with the same problem.
This also evaluates to false but you could use it if you use it around the entirety of the left hand
side and right hand side of your equality comparison.
So you could write it this way instead you might say round the summation to five decimal points or five
are digits after the decimal point and test that that's equal to round 0.3 to 5 digits after the decimal
point.
And obviously that will be true.
So that's one way of doing it.
But this isn't very flexible right.
You're just rounding basically.
And then we also get into issues with rounding because what does rounding mean.
And as we'll see later it's not you know necessarily what we're accustomed to with rounding.
So there's probably a better way to do that.
But at this point we have these two methods we can round both sides of the equality expression to some
real number of significant digits.
So something like this but more generally we could use an appropriate range.
Let's say some value let's call it Epsilon within which two numbers are considered are deemed to be
equal to each other.
So formally the definition would be something like this for some Epsilon greater than zero.
Epsilon is your choice.
You can pick it as small as you want but a positive number.
So zero point 0 0 0 1 if you want numbers to be within zero point zero zero zero or one of each other
then eight will be equal to B if and only if the absolute value the distance between A and B is less
than this Epsilon value is specified.
So as long as the difference between the two numbers is less than some small you know positive number
then we can consider those two numbers to be equal.
There are approximately equal.
They're close to each other.
So you could write your own method.
Let's say there is equal we pass in the two numbers x and y we pass in this tolerance the epsilon value.
And we look at the absolute value of X minus Y and we use the floating point absolute value that's in
the math Mondial and we test whether that's less than that Epsilon we passed them.
If it is they close.
If it's not they're not considered cause.
So this can be tweaked by specifying that the difference between the two numbers the percentage of their
size.
In other words the smaller the number the smaller the tolerance the larger the number the larger the
tolerance.
Now the words are two numbers within a percentage of each other.
Right.
Within a certain percentage of each other.
That's just a tweak instead of your using an absolute value here.
We're using a relative value.
Now there's a reason why we want to do that.
And we're going to get into that in a minute.
And we are however have to be careful because this looks pretty straightforward right.
Even this one looks very straightforward.
This one's maybe just a tad more complicated but there are issues with both of these.
Right.
They look very simple but there's actually some minor issues that we're going to have to resolve using
these two approaches and typically it occurs when the numbers are very close to zero versus numbers
that are away from zero.
And let's take a look at that.
So let's start by using absolute tolerances so that Epsilon that we talked about.
So again let's take our typical example and if we you know print out X to that number of decimal values
and print out y.
That's what we get.
Now the difference between them is this small number of k that digit 5 is in the 17th position after
the decimal point let's take a look at another example where a and b now are the variables and we're
looking at ten thousand point one plus ten thousand point one and so on and then B is thirty thousand
point three.
So technically we would expect when we're looking at decimal representations A to be equal to be just
like we had X was actually equal to y.
Now if we print those numbers out with more precision then we'll notice that the difference between
the two again they're not exact and the difference between the two is this small number here where this
digit 3 is the twelfth digit after the decimal point.
Now let's say that we had to find a tolerance to be 10 to the minus 15.
Right.
Which is this number here.
Because when you use an absolute tolerance you can't change that tolerance as the numbers of a and b
are x and y change you're keeping the same tolerance you don't know you know how would you know that.
All I should make the tolerance ten to the minus five year and ten to the minus 15 there.
Right.
We don't that's where the relative tolerances will come into play.
That's why we bring that in.
But for now we're using an absolute tolerance.
So if we do that then if we make this test that the absolute value of X minus Y these x minus Y is less
than the absolute tolerance where the absolute tolerance is this number over here.
And as you notice right the absolute tolerance is at this position the first significant digit is at
this position which means the delta is less than the tolerance.
And so that will evaluate to true.
But take a look at the second example where we look at the absolute value of a mine is B.
Right.
And now we're looking at that Delta basically and comparing it to their absolute tolerance.
Well the delta is greater than this.
They'll the same tolerance.
So in fact this will actually actually evaluate to false.
So we have a problem because technically if we look at this we probably would consider these two numbers
to be close enough right.
Why.
Because it's a large number to the left hand side.
So in relative terms these two numbers are close in relative terms.
These two numbers are close right but in absolute terms when we have to specify an absolute tolerance
then these two numbers are close but these two are not.
Hence why we probably want to also look at relative tolerances.
So let's take a look at that example again.
Right.
So the same two examples.
And let's say we specify a relative tolerance of some percentage 0.00 1 percent which is 10 to the negative
five.
In other words that's the maximum allowed difference between the two numbers but relative to the larger
magnitude of the two numbers.
So we're going to make that we're going to calculate an absolute tolerance.
But it's going to be based on the magnitude of the numbers we're looking at.
So we'll look at let's say and we will look at the larger of the two numbers.
Calculate what is zero.
What is it.
You know what is 0 1 0 0 or 1 percent.
What does it mean to be within zero point zero zero or 1 percent of the larger of the two numbers.
If that second number is within that amount then they're of course.
So let's just take a look at what that means.
That means that we are going to calculate an absolute tolerance which is going to be our relative tolerance
times the maximum magnitude.
We don't care about the signs.
Right.
We only care about we're.
I mean we'll care about the science when we look at the difference between the two numbers.
But when looking at the tolerance we only need to look at the magnitude of the numbers.
So in this case the tolerance would be if we use this formula which would be zero point 0 0 0 0 0 3.
And in the second example our tolerance would be much bigger.
Zero Point 3 0 0 0 0 3.
Right.
So you notice that the tolerance that we would use as an absolute tolerance is smaller here than here.
And that kind of makes sense because this is a much larger number.
So to be within zero point 0 0 1 percent means that you know we can be a little bit more off than in
this example here.
And again it makes intuitive sense when we look at it mathematically.
Yeah.
You know these two numbers are close.
If they're within a certain amount but if you know if these are within a certain amount after the decimal
point.
Well that's OK because it's a big number in front.
So in this case if we calculate that now using this talent these tolerance tolerances we calculated
here for years the same formula as before that we used for an absolute tolerance that will evaluate
to true.
And the second one with a minus B.
We'll also evaluate to true.
Now the words success we've solved it.
What have we.
And the answer is not quite.
We're not quite there yet.
Remember I said it gets tricky.
So let's take a look.
Let's take a look at this example.
Right.
So we have X which is a number that's very close to zero.
And for simplicity made y actually exactly equal to zero.
So turned to the negative 10 knife which is a relative tolerance here.
Then let's even have a lounge one you know 0.1 percent.
That means 10 to the negative three.
But what does it mean according to that formula that says that the absolute tolerance is going to get
calculated as the relative tolerance times the maximum of those two numbers.
Well why is zero.
So it's always going to be the relative tolerance times the magnitude of X itself which is going to
work out to tend to the negative 13.
In other words we want these two numbers to be within 10 to the negative 13 of each other.
But look at this number that's 10 to the negative 10.
So if we do the calculation that comes out to false.
Right.
And it will always be the case because these numbers are close to zero.
And this one in this case is actually equal to zero tolerance we calculate here is always going to become
greater than the actual difference between the two.
So using a relative tolerance technique doesn't work well and sometimes doesn't work at all.
Awful numbers that are close to zero.
Right.
So using absolute and relative tolerances in isolation.
Right and using either one or the other makes it very difficult to get a solution that works kind of
uniformly across any number you might encounter as your program is running.
So we can combine both methods.
That's the better approach.
We're going to combine both methods where we're going to specify an absolute tolerance and a relative
tolerance.
And then after we've done that we'll use the larger of the two tolerances the larger number because
remember they're always positive so we're going to take the number that's closer to zero.
Sorry that's further away from 0 and use that as our tolerance in our calculation.
So in other words our tolerance will become the max of the relative tolerance times the max of x and
y which was you know this thing we calculated here when we were using relative tolerances and the max
with the absolute tolerance that we would specify.
So let's see how that really works.
Now if you want to read more about that it's specified in the Pepp 485 document.
You can just do a search for that in your browser and you'll see the documentation for that.
But basically it's exactly what we've defined here.
What we're talking about using a combination of the absolute and relative tolerances.
Now the math module has that built in for us.
We don't have to write that method ourselves.
I just wanted to explain to you you know how it works because we need to understand what those parameters
are in this method called is close.
Again you can reference pet 45 if you want to get it you know an explanation of how this works but essentially
that's just what I've said.
So there is close method is in the math module and it takes in at least two parameters the two values
that we want to compare and optional you can specify the relative tolerance which will default to tend
to the negative 9 and the absolute tolerance that defaults to 0 which means that when that happens it's
the same as if we hadn't specified an absolute tolerance at all.
So in other words by default if you just say it's close a combi you are ditching the absolute tolerance
part and you're only using a relative tolerance comparison which may be fine but remember that doesn't
work well for numbers that are close to zero.
So a word of warning if you do not specify the absolute tolerance it is zero and you'll face that problem
that we saw just now when using relative tolerances with numbers close to zero.
So let's take a look at an example let's take two numbers that are quite different from zero right that
far away from zero.
And if we look at math that is close x Khama y.
So we let these defaults you know fall through then that will evaluate to true.
That's great.
Now let's take two numbers that are close to zero.
And if we evaluate math that is close a comma B then that will be false.
And that's because the absolute tolerance is 0 and therefore the relative tolerances is creating a problem
here.
So probably not a good idea to not specify the absolute tolerance unless you know that that's what you
want so you should probably always specify the absolute tolerance until you know you don't need it.
So if we use the absolute tolerance and specify it let's say you know we'll use tend to the negative
5.
Then this will evaluate to true and using the same absolute tolerance here.
And that is close we'll also evaluate to true.
So that solves the problem.
It also works well in situations like this.
Let's say we have this number here you know 1000 point 0 1 1000 point or two we probably consider those
numbers close to each other.
Right.
They've Yeah they're within 0 1 0 1.
But look at it's 1000.
So relatively speaking they close to each other.
And if we look at the close function we'll specify a relative tolerance of 10 to the negative 5 and
the absolute tolerance of 10 to the negative 5 that evaluates to true.
That makes sense but would expect that.
However look at these two numbers 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 2.
They are also within 0.01 of each other.
What we probably wouldn't think of those numbers as being close because relatively speaking they are
not close to each other.
Right that's a pretty big difference.
If you look at it in relative terms and if we use the same expression right the same tolerances as before
and that's the important part is that we don't have to change tolerances at all.
Then this will evaluate to false.
So that's the advantage of combining relative and absolute tolerances into one method and using that.
And when you want to compare floating point numbers don't use that equals equals you're going to run
into issues with that use the is close method in the math module that will give you what you're looking
for are the numbers close enough because you can't count on them being exact.
Now if you want numbers to be exact then use fractions.
Use rational numbers like fraction.
You know one over three.
We saw that in the fractions section.
So use those things.
We also have the option of using decimals.
And we'll look at decimals in a future video coming soon.
But for now working with floats you're as close to compare for equality between floating point numbers.
You should also play around with these a little bit.
I think you know after this video is finished and after we've gone through the code play around with
different numbers and test and see how it works.
Start getting a feel for it.
It's kind of important that you kind of have an understanding of how this works so then when you're
writing your code you kind of know what tolerances you want to use.
Sometimes the tolerances I actually dictated by the problem that you're working on.
But sometimes you have to come up with them yourself.
And so you know you want to try and strike a good balance.
So let's take a look at some code.
We'll do that in the next video and I'll see you in a bit.